<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
			<p>I have never seen a man quite so surprised as Inspector Weymouth.</p>
			<p>“This is absolutely incredible!” he said. “There’s only one door to your chambers. We found it bolted from the inside.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” groaned West, pressing his hand to his forehead. “I bolted it myself at eleven o’clock, when I came in.”</p>
			<p>“No human being could climb up or down to your windows. The plans of the aero-torpedo were inside a safe.”</p>
			<p>“I put them there myself,” said West, “on returning from the War Office, and I had occasion to consult them after I had come in and bolted the door. I returned them to the safe and locked it. That it was still locked you saw for yourselves, and no one else in the world knows the combination.”</p>
			<p>“But the plans have gone,” said Weymouth. “It’s magic! How was it done? What happened last night, sir? What did you mean when you rang us up?”</p>
			<p>Smith during this colloquy was pacing rapidly up and down the room. He turned abruptly to the aviator.</p>
			<p>“Every fact you can remember, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West, please,” he said tersely; “and be as brief as you possibly can.”</p>
			<p>“I came in, as I said,” explained West, “about eleven o’clock and having made some notes relating to an interview arranged for this morning, I locked the plans in the safe and turned in.”</p>
			<p>“There was no one hidden anywhere in your chambers?” snapped Smith.</p>
			<p>“There was not,” replied West. “I looked. I invariably do. Almost immediately, I went to sleep.”</p>
			<p>“How many chloral tabloids did you take?” I interrupted.</p>
			<p>Norris West turned to me with a slow smile.</p>
			<p>“You’re cute, Doctor,” he said. “I took two. It’s a bad habit, but I can’t sleep without. They are specially made up for me by a firm in Philadelphia.”</p>
			<p>“How long sleep lasted, when it became filled with uncanny dreams, and when those dreams merged into reality, I do not know⁠—shall never know, I suppose. But out of the dreamless void a face came to me⁠—closer⁠—closer⁠—and peered into mine.</p>
			<p>“I was in that curious condition wherein one knows that one is dreaming and seeks to awaken⁠—to escape. But a nightmare-like oppression held me. So I must lie and gaze into the seared yellow face that hung over me, for it would drop so close that I could trace the cicatrized scar running from the left ear to the corner of the mouth, and drawing up the lip like the lip of a snarling cur. I could look into the malignant, jaundiced eyes; I could hear the dim whispering of the distorted mouth⁠—whispering that seemed to counsel something⁠—something evil. That whispering intimacy was indescribably repulsive. Then the wicked yellow face would be withdrawn, and would recede until it became as a pin’s head in the darkness far above me⁠—almost like a glutinous, liquid thing.</p>
			<p>“Somehow I got upon my feet, or dreamed I did⁠—God knows where dreaming ended and reality began. Gentlemen, maybe you’ll conclude I went mad last night, but as I stood holding on to the bedrail I heard the blood throbbing through my arteries with a noise like a screw-propeller. I started laughing. The laughter issued from my lips with a shrill whistling sound that pierced me with physical pain and seemed to wake the echoes of the whole block. I thought myself I was going mad, and I tried to command my will⁠—to break the power of the chloral⁠—for I concluded that I had accidentally taken an overdose.</p>
			<p>“Then the walls of my bedroom started to recede, till at last I stood holding on to a bed which had shrunk to the size of a doll’s cot, in the middle of a room like Trafalgar Square! That window yonder was such a long way off I could scarcely see it, but I could just detect a Chinaman⁠—the owner of the evil yellow face⁠—creeping through it. He was followed by another, who was enormously tall⁠—so tall that, as they came towards me (and it seemed to take them something like half-an-hour to cross this incredible apartment in my dream), the second Chinaman seemed to tower over me like a cypress-tree.</p>
			<p>“I looked up to his face⁠—his wicked, hairless face. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith, whatever age I live to, I’ll never forget that face I saw last night⁠—or did I see it? God knows! The pointed chin, the great dome of a forehead, and the eyes⁠—heavens above, the huge green eyes!”</p>
			<p>He shook like a sick man, and I glanced at Smith significantly. Inspector Weymouth was stroking his mustache, and his mingled expression of incredulity and curiosity was singular to behold.</p>
			<p>“The pumping of my blood,” continued West, “seemed to be bursting my body; the room kept expanding and contracting. One time the ceiling would be pressing down on my head, and the Chinamen⁠—sometimes I thought there were two of them, sometimes twenty⁠—became dwarfs; the next instant it shot up like the roof of a cathedral.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Can I be awake,’ I whispered, ‘or am I dreaming?’</p>
			<p>“My whisper went sweeping in windy echoes about the walls, and was lost in the shadowy distances up under the invisible roof.</p>
			<p>“ ‘You are dreaming⁠—yes.’ It was the Chinaman with the green eyes who was addressing me, and the words that he uttered appeared to occupy an immeasurable time in the utterance. ‘But at will I can render the subjective objective.’ I don’t think I can have dreamed those singular words, gentlemen.</p>
			<p>“And then he fixed the green eyes upon me⁠—the blazing green eyes. I made no attempt to move. They seemed to be draining me of something vital⁠—bleeding me of every drop of mental power. The whole nightmare room grew green, and I felt that I was being absorbed into its greenness.</p>
			<p>“I can see what you think. And even in my delirium⁠—if it was delirium⁠—I thought the same. Now comes the climax of my experience⁠—my vision⁠—I don’t know what to call it. I <em>saw</em> some <em>words</em> issuing from my own mouth!”</p>
			<p>Inspector Weymouth coughed discreetly. Smith whisked round upon him.</p>
			<p>“This will be outside your experience, Inspector, I know,” he said, “but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norris West’s statement does not surprise me in the least. I know to what the experience was due.”</p>
			<p>Weymouth stared incredulously, but a dawning perception of the truth was come to me, too.</p>
			<p>“How I <em>saw</em> a <em>sound</em> I just won’t attempt to explain; I simply tell you I saw it. Somehow I knew I had betrayed myself⁠—given something away.”</p>
			<p>“You gave away the secret of the lock combination!” rapped Smith.</p>
			<p>“Eh!” grunted Weymouth.</p>
			<p>But West went on hoarsely:</p>
			<p>“Just before the blank came a name flashed before my eyes. It was ‘Bayard Taylor.’ ”</p>
			<p>At that I interrupted West.</p>
			<p>“I understand!” I cried. “I understand! Another name has just occurred to me, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West⁠—that of the Frenchman, Moreau.”</p>
			<p>“You have solved the mystery,” said Smith. “It was natural <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West should have thought of the American traveler, Bayard Taylor, though. Moreau’s book is purely scientific. He has probably never read it.”</p>
			<p>“I fought with the stupor that was overcoming me,” continued West, “striving to associate that vaguely familiar name with the fantastic things through which I moved. It seemed to me that the room was empty again. I made for the hall, for the telephone. I could scarcely drag my feet along. It seemed to take me half-an-hour to get there. I remember calling up Scotland Yard, and I remember no more.”</p>
			<p>There was a short, tense interval.</p>
			<p>In some respects I was nonplussed; but, frankly, I think Inspector Weymouth considered West insane. Smith, his hands locked behind his back, stared out of the window.</p>
			<p>“<em>Andaman⁠—second</em>,” he said suddenly. “Weymouth, when is the first train to Tilbury?”</p>
			<p>“Five twenty-two from Fenchurch Street,” replied the Scotland Yard man promptly.</p>
			<p>“Too late!” rapped my friend. “Jump in a taxi and pick up two good men to leave for China at once! Then go and charter a special to Tilbury to leave in twenty-five minutes. Order another cab to wait outside for me.”</p>
			<p>Weymouth was palpably amazed, but Smith’s tone was imperative. The Inspector departed hastily.</p>
			<p>I stared at Smith, not comprehending what prompted this singular course.</p>
			<p>“Now that you can think clearly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West,” he said, “of what does your experience remind you? The errors of perception regarding time; the idea of <em>seeing a sound</em>; the illusion that the room alternately increased and diminished in size; your fit of laughter, and the recollection of the name Bayard Taylor. Since evidently you are familiar with that author’s work⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land of the Saracen</i>, is it not?⁠—these symptoms of the attack should be familiar, I think.”</p>
			<p>Norris West pressed his hands to his evidently aching head.</p>
			<p>“Bayard Taylor’s book,” he said dully. “Yes! … I know of what my brain sought to remind me⁠—Taylor’s account of his experience under hashish. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith, someone doped me with hashish!”</p>
			<p>Smith nodded grimly.</p>
			<p>“<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cannabis indica</i>,” I said⁠—“Indian hemp. That is what you were drugged with. I have no doubt that now you experience a feeling of nausea and intense thirst, with aching in the muscles, particularly the deltoid. I think you must have taken at least fifteen grains.”</p>
			<p>Smith stopped his perambulations immediately in front of West, looking into his dulled eyes.</p>
			<p>“Someone visited your chambers last night,” he said slowly, “and for your chloral tabloids substituted some containing hashish, or perhaps not pure hashish. Fu-Manchu is a profound chemist.”</p>
			<p>Norris West started.</p>
			<p>“Someone substituted⁠—” he began.</p>
			<p>“Exactly,” said Smith, looking at him keenly; “someone who was here yesterday. Have you any idea whom it could have been?”</p>
			<p>West hesitated. “I had a visitor in the afternoon,” he said, seemingly speaking the words unwillingly, “but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“A lady?” jerked Smith. “I suggest that it was a lady.”</p>
			<p>West nodded.</p>
			<p>“You’re quite right,” he admitted. “I don’t know how you arrived at the conclusion, but a lady whose acquaintance I made recently⁠—a foreign lady.”</p>
			<p>“Karamanèh!” snapped Smith.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you mean in the least, but she came here⁠—knowing this to be my present address⁠—to ask me to protect her from a mysterious man who had followed her right from Charing Cross. She said he was down in the lobby, and naturally, I asked her to wait here whilst I went and sent him about his business.”</p>
			<p>He laughed shortly.</p>
			<p>“I am over-old,” he said, “to be guyed by a woman. You spoke just now of someone called Fu-Manchu. Is that the crook I’m indebted to for the loss of my plans? I’ve had attempts made by agents of two European governments, but a Chinaman is a novelty.”</p>
			<p>“This Chinaman,” Smith assured him, “is the greatest novelty of his age. You recognize your symptoms now from Bayard Taylor’s account?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> West’s statement,” I said, “ran closely parallel with portions of Moreau’s book on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hashish Hallucinations</i>. Only Fu-Manchu, I think, would have thought of employing Indian hemp. I doubt, though, if it was pure <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cannabis indica</i>. At any rate, it acted as an opiate⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And drugged <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West,” interrupted Smith, “sufficiently to enable Fu-Manchu to enter unobserved.”</p>
			<p>“Whilst it produced symptoms which rendered him an easy subject for the Doctor’s influence. It is difficult in this case to separate hallucination from reality, but I think, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> West, that Fu-Manchu must have exercised an hypnotic influence upon your drugged brain. We have evidence that he dragged from you the secret of the combination.”</p>
			<p>“God knows we have!” said West. “But who is this Fu-Manchu, and how⁠—how in the name of wonder did he get into my chambers?”</p>
			<p>Smith pulled out his watch. “That,” he said rapidly, “I cannot delay to explain if I’m to intercept the man who has the plans. Come along, Petrie; we must be at Tilbury within the hour. There is just a bare chance.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
